---
layout: post
title: Open Source Software a necessary tool to build our movements
description: "Open Source Software"
modified: 2016-07-25
category: articles
tags: [Ramblings]
image:
comments: false
share: true
---

We use software constantly: on our phones, on our computers, in cars,
televisions and other devices we use daily. The way software is made,
however, remains foreign to most people. Many academics have tried to
rebrand the work done by designers and coders of software as "knowledge
work" in an effort to set it apart from other types of work. The
knowledge work is separated simply because the end product is intangible
and the workplace is more geographically amorphous. Make no mistake,
those hordes of coders and developers typing away at their computers are
workers just as much as the auto assembly line worker or the steel plant
worker, and their conditions are just as oppressive.

There is an obvious and essential difference between software and a
physical product -- such as a car. Unlike a car, software requires time
to build the first one, but no time and very little energy to produce
the next one. The majority of work that goes on is refinement and
redevelopment of existing software products.

This makes production of software more like the work of researchers,
academics, journalists, teachers and artists. For these types of
workers, production is better when more people are engaged at all levels
and the product increases in value the more it is shared. Software, like
science and medical knowledge, is a social good.

On the other side, proprietary software and its corporate vendors are
ubiquitous, shiny, advertised to the point where it seems as though
everyone else uses them. We are familiar with them because they are
pushed on us by our employers who bought into their sales pitches, have
outsourced the development to cheaper labour and now spend too much
money on per-employee licences not to force everyone to use them.
Vendors like Microsoft, Oracle, IBM, BlackBerry, etc. are classic
examples.

Behind the shine, proprietary software is produced by outsourced,
non-union workers, the majority of which have no benefits and little
health and safety support. Their work environments are male-dominated,
where sexual harassment abounds, where age and experience are often seen
as negative attributes. The knowledge developed in these environments is
then sold at huge profit to the private investors with little care about
the social impacts.

For these reasons, using closed source, proprietary software products is
akin to buying clothes made in sweatshops, buying from companies that
have outsourced to overseas production, supporting private knowledge
development or for-profit medicine. And, given that alternatives to most
proprietary software do exist, it is unconscionable for progressives to
continue to turn a blind eye to their use by either themselves or their
organizations.

If it were any other products, we would reject buying them out of
principle. And just like sweatshop-made clothing, there are plenty of
alternatives made in more equitable conditions.

Even the corporate world is catching on to this reality. The majority of
the software that is used by the technology service companies,
jouralism, secure communications, and auto makers like Toyota has been
developed by with the open source software community. The companies know
that this software is better, cheaper to implement and maintain
in-house.

Socialists demand that our organizations buy unionized products, oppose
outsourcing of work to lower wages and act in solidarity with other
workers. For the same reasons, we should be demanding the rejection of
proprietary software when alternatives exist and demanding in-house
developers be employed and their code shared with the rest of the
movement. We must reject the millions of dollars wasted through the
purchase of restrictive and unnecessary licences when that money could
be used to employ people to expand development.

The call to use of open source software is a call for social justice
just like many others. To ignore it is to not only be culpable in the
expansion of massive software monopolies, but to undermine the very
movement to which we belong.

• [Open Source Software List: The Ultimate
List](http://citizenspress.us10.list-manage.com/track/click?u=27d7d00e19a37005743125d7e&id=a2a37d571a&e=580a6e5d4b)

• [Politics of Software Development and
Implementation](http://citizenspress.us10.list-manage.com/track/click?u=27d7d00e19a37005743125d7e&id=cc4dba06a2&e=580a6e5d4b)

• [Philosophy of the GNU
Project](http://citizenspress.us10.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=27d7d00e19a37005743125d7e&id=12c373206a&e=580a6e5d4b)

• [Why Open Source Software? Look at the
Numbers!](http://citizenspress.us10.list-manage.com/track/click?u=27d7d00e19a37005743125d7e&id=63b060e997&e=580a6e5d4b)
